docs: expansion docs rewrite (#2707)
open-policy-agent/gatekeeper: website/docs/expansion.md

---
id: expansion

> title: Validating Workload Resources using `ExapansionTemplate`s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Validating Workload Resources Using `ExapansionTemplate`s
```

Author: i think it's fine not to capitalize the `u` there

---

`Feature State:` Gatekeeper version v3.10+ (alpha)

> ❗This feature is in _alpha_ stage, and is not enabled by default. To
> enable, set the `enable-generator-resource-expansion` flag.

## Motivation

A workload resource is a resource that creates other resources, such as a
[Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) or [Job](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/job/). Gatekeeper can be configured to reject workload resources
that create a resource that violates a constraint. 

## `ExpansionTemplate`s explained

> An `ExpansionTemplate` is a custom resource that Gatekeeper will use to simulate a workload resource expansion. Gatekeeper will create temporary, fake resources and validate the constraints against them. We prefer to these resources that Gatekeeper creates for validation pruposes as `expanded resources` but `mock resources`, `simualted resources`, `resulting resources` or `resultant resources` refer to the same notion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `ExpansionTemplate` is a custom resource that Gatekeeper will use to simulate a workload resource expansion. Gatekeeper will create temporary, fake resources and validate the constraints against them. We refer to these resources that Gatekeeper creates for validation purposes as `expanded resources`, but  the terms `mock resources`, `simulated resources`, `resulting resources`, and `resultant resources` all refer to the same notion.
```

> An `ExpansionTemplate` is a custom resource that Gatekeeper will use to simulate a workload resource expansion. Gatekeeper will create temporary, fake resources and validate the constraints against them. We refer to these resources that Gatekeeper creates for validation purposes as `expanded resources`, but  the terms `mock resources`, `simulated resources`, `resulting resources`, and `resultant resources` all refer to the same notion.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can limit our use of these different adjectives (expanded, mock, resultant, ect) so that we don't have to explain ourselves. 

We are basically (if not literally) using them all interchangeably. 

Perhaps we can just use the terminology "expanded resources", explain it here like you did, and replace all occurrences of its synonyms?

Reviewer 3: Same thing for verbs.

Author: Regarding adjectives and descriptors:

- I replaced everything w `expanded` or reworded things to have `expanded` EXCEPT FOR when we actually define them. 

Regarding verbs:

- I think all verbs other than `expand` have been taken out EXCEPT FOR when we define what it means to expand a resource.

The `ExpansionTemplate` custom resource specifies:

> - Which workload resource(s) should be simulated, specified by their GVK

Reviewer 3: "simulated" adds a new verb to the mix, similar to adjectives, we should focus on one verb to avoid confusion

- The GVK of the resulting resources
- The "source", a field to use as the blueprint for the resulting resource. The template

>   source is a field on the parent resource which will be used as the base (TODO: define) for

Reviewer 3: dangling TODO

Author: Thanks for highlighting that -- I was going to check in w @davis-haba about this but I actually rewrote the word `base` out of here. Let me know if y'all think the result is better. Current bullet point reads:

```
- The "source" as defined in the field `templateSource` on the `parent resource`, which is used as the blueprint for the expanded resource. For example, in a case where a
  `Deployment` expands into a `Pod`, `spec.template` would typically be the
  source.
  ```
  
  One less things for use to define!

      kinds: ["Job"]
      versions: ["v1"]
  templateSource: "spec.template"

>   enforcementAction: "warn" # this will overwrite all constraint enforcement actions for the GVKs below that result from the GVKs above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  enforcementAction: "warn" # This will overwrite all constraint enforcement actions for the GVKs below that result from the GVKs above.
```

  generatedGVK:
    kind: "Pod"
    group: ""
    version: "v1"
```

With this `ExpansionTemplate`, any constraints that are configured to target

> `Pods` will be alsp evaluated on the temporary, fake pods that Gatekeeper creates when a `Deployment` /`ReplicaSet` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Pods` will also be evaluated on the temporary, fake pods that Gatekeeper creates when a `Deployment` or `ReplicaSet` is
```

being reviewed. Any violations created against these resulting `Pod`s, and only these resulting `Pod`s, will have their
enforcement action set to `warn`, regardless of the enforcement actions
specified by the Constraint in violation.

If, for any reason, you want to exempt simulated resources from a specific

> constraint, look at the [Match Source](#match-source) section below.

Reviewer 2: I think the main use case for using `Match.source` with ETs isn't to exempt specific resources (blacklist), but rather to only target the "fake" generated resources. 

In the case of mutators, one might be interested in simulating controller behavior by only mutating the "fake" resulting resources

In the case of constraints, one could create a Pod-reviewing constraint is specifically for validating expanded Pods. 

To this end, maybe something like:
"To see how to use Mutators and Constraints to exclusively apply to expanded resources, see the [Match Source](#match-source) section below." ?

### Limitations

#### Sidecars and Mutators

It may not always be possible to build an accurate representation of a
mock resource by looking at the workload resource alone. For example, suppose a
cluster is using [Istio](https://istio.io/), which will inject a sidecar container on specific
resources. This sidecar configuration is not specified in the config of the
workload resource (i.e. Deployment), but rather injected by Istio's webhook. In
order to accurately represent mock resources modified by controllers or
webhooks, Gatekeeper leverages its
[Mutations](mutation.md)
feature to allow mock resources to be manipulated into their desired form. In
the Istio example, `Assign` and `ModifySet` mutators could be configured to
mimic Istio sidecar injection. For further details on mutating mock resources
see the [Match Source](#match-source) section below, or to see a working example,
see the [Example](#example) section.

> #### Enforcement Points

Reviewer 3: The title doesn't match the content.

"Unknown Data"?

Any resources configured for expansion will be expanded by both the validating
webhook and
[Audit](audit.md). This

> feature will only be enabled if a user creates a `ExpansionTemplate` that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
feature will only be enabled if a user creates an `ExpansionTemplate` that
```

targets any resources that exist on the cluster.

Note that the accuracy of enforcement depends on how well the mock resource
resembles the real thing. Mutations can help with this, but 100% accuracy is

> impossible because not all fields can be predicted. For instance, deployments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
impossible because not all fields can be predicted. For instance, Deployments
```

> create pods with random names. Inaccurate mocks may lead to over or under
> enforcement. In the case of under enforcement, the resultant pod should still be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
create pods with random names. Inaccurate mocks may lead to over- or under-
enforcement. In the case of under-enforcement, the resultant pod should still be
```

rejected. Finally, non-state-based policies (those that rely on transient
metadata such as requesting user or time of creation) cannot be enforced
accurately. This is because such metadata would necessarily be different when

> creating the resultant resource. For example, a deployment is created using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
creating the resultant resource. For example, a Deployment is created using the
```

requesting user's account, but the pod creation request comes from the service

> account of the deployment controller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
account of the Deployment controller.
```
